before I do that I just want to remind
you of what we're trying to achieve our
plan is to slow the spread and to
protect the NHS so that the NHS is
always there for you and your family
whenever you need it
whether for coronavirus or anything else
that goal is working the number of spare
critical care beds in the NHS is 3413 on
the latest figures there have been 1
million 291,000 tests for coronavirus
including 85,000 186 tests on Sunday
yesterday a hundred and ninety thousand
584 people have now tested positive for
coronavirus an increase of three
thousand nine hundred and eighty-five
thirteen thousand two hundred and fifty
eight people are in hospital with
coronavirus and twenty eight thousand
seven hundred and thirty-four people
have died that's across all settings an
increase of two hundred and eighty eight
that figure is lower than at any point
since the end of March
but as with testing these reported
figures tend to be lower over the
weekend so we do do expect that number
to rise and remember this is not just a
number but it is a constant insistent
reminder that we must go further and
faster in our national effort in dealing
with this virus over the last month
we've built a national testing
infrastructure capable of over a hundred
thousand tests a day today the capacity
stands at a hundred and eight thousand
this means we're now in a position to
start implementing the next part of our
plan track and trace the aim of test
track and trace is to hunt down and
isolate the virus so it's unable to
reproduce and crucially test track and
trace allows us to take a more target
approach to lockdown while still safely
containing the disease creating this
system is a huge national undertaking of
unprecedented scale and complexity we've
already taken Britain's small but
brilliant Diagnostics industry and taken
it to global scale we're building an
army of human contact tracers who can
man the phones and find the contacts and
support people and of course we're
developing the contact tracing app which
can help us deliver test track and trace
on the mass scale that we need across
the country the app which takes full
consideration of privacy and security
has already been tested in closed
conditions at an RAF base and today I
can announce the next steps from
tomorrow we will begin to pilot test
track and trace on the Isle of Wight
starting with health professionals and
rolling out this week to all citizens
I'm grateful to the huge enthusiasm
shown by Islanders who who know that by
participating in this pilot they're at
the forefront of helping get Britain
back on her feet where the Isle of Wight
goes Britain follows the island has a
single NHS trust one local authority
with the responsibilities for Public
Health a relatively low number of Kovac
cases and because it's an island we can
run this trial in proper scientifically
controlled conditions comparing the
effect with the effect and with what's
going on on the mainland before we roll
it out to the rest of the country so
here's how it'll work last week we put
in place the testing capability on the
island from tonight
the contact tracing capability will go
live and then tomorrow NHS staff on the
island will be able to download the app
and from Thursday each one of the 80,000
households on the island will get a
letter from the chief nurse with
comprehensive information about the
trial Islanders will then be asked to
install the app once you've installed
the app it'll start logging the distance
between you
or phone and other phones with an app
nearby it's been designed with a form of
Bluetooth that conserves power so the
app won't drain your battery and this
log of proximity information will then
be securely stored on your phone if you
become unwell with covert symptoms you
inform the NHS via the app other app
users who you've had significant contact
with in the last few days will then be
sent an alert by the NHS along with
advice about what to do a test ordering
function will then be built-in if you're
watching this and you live on the Isle
of Wight I have a simple message please
download the app to protect the NHS and
save lives by downloading the app you're
protecting your own health you're
protecting the health of your loved ones
and the health of your community I know
the people of the Isle of Wight will
embrace this with enthusiasm because by
embarking on this project and by
embracing test track and trace you will
be saving lives the pilot is important
so we can help make sure the app works
as well as it possibly can alongside the
contact tracing system and with your
help we'll learn a lot we'll use it to
make things better and we want to hear
from you I want to stress and this is
really important that this trial does
not mean the end of social distancing on
the Isle of Wight or anywhere else for
that matter
we will only change the social
distancing rules once our five tests are
met so I'll end with the instruction
that we all know please stay at home
protect the NHS and save lives or if you
live on the Isle of Wight stay at home
install the app protect the NHS and save
lives I'll now turn to professor van tam
to take us through the day's charts
Thank You secretary state so let's begin
again with refreshing the five tests
that we have in place for deciding if
we're going to adjust the lockdown the
first is around NHS capacity and we're
in a good position on that one the
second one is about a sustained and
consistent fall in daily deaths from
coronavirus and it is now very clear in
the data that we are past the peak the
next one is solid information that the
rate of infection is decreasing to
manageable levels right across the board
this is an indicator that we need to
keep a close eye on over the next few
days and weeks the fourth one is around
operational challenges around testing
and PPE and being able to meet future
demand there are continuing challenges
on PPE it is an absolute priority to
continue pushing on this to get it right
in the long run but of course in on
testing as you've heard from the
secretary of state we're in a very good
position and finally we have to be
confident that the adjustments we
contemplate are not going to risk a
second peak of infections and this is
really a matter of deep scientific
discussion very very close following and
absorbing of the evidence and one that
we're keeping under detailed scientific
review as the days and weeks go by next
slide please
now this slide actually shows search
data of people looking at Apple maps for
directions over driving over walking
routes or over using public transport
and it tells the same story as slides
you have seen before about how since we
announced these social disks
Tsing measures the public continue to
observe the instructions to work with us
to work to protect the NHS and get case
numbers down and you can see very very
consistent trends over reduced searches
for driving instructions walking
instructions and use of public transport
so we need to keep going let's keep
going and continue to drop the curve
further next slide please
these are this is a graph showing from
the 6th of April through to the 4th of
May daily tests completed for
coronavirus and you can see on the right
hand side the latest data showing 85,000
tests completed on the 4th of May our
capacity is 108 thousand tests and there
is another lab opening next week so this
is all very encouraging tests are going
up people are using testing services
more and we are well within our capacity
capability next slide please
now this slide shows new cases of corona
virus in the UK from the 21st of March
you can see that obvious peak up to a
high level in early April and then you
can see the pattern that has occurred in
terms of new cases right up until the
4th of May on this one I have to say
that new cases need to come down further
we have to continue to track this index
and we have to get cases lower if you
look to the next slide please
here we array the number of people in
hospital with kovat 19 from 17th of
March through to the 3rd of May and
after peaks in the middle of April you
can see that in
almost all areas now there are steady
but absolutely consistent declines
occurring possibly in a small number of
areas the trend is somewhat flat but
overall there are now steady declines in
the number of people in hospital this is
good news
following on please the next slide
critical care beds ICU beds here again
across all four nations you can see
largely continuing declines and possibly
a more important point if you look at
the axis on the left of the slide the
y-axis you can see where we are in terms
of capacity and there is plenty of ICU
capacity which is extremely good I turn
now to deaths in all settings and here
you can see that there is a slow but
consistent decline you will see the
weekend effect very clearly especially
if you look at the three steps on the
right hand side of the chart fewer
deaths are actually recorded reported at
the weekends that's an artifact of the
way people report deaths but overall if
you look at the orange line the
seven-day and smoothed out rolling
average there is this slow but
consistent decline which is absolutely
going in the right direction now and
then the final slide is one we have
shown for some time showing a comparison
across countries dating back to the day
when 5050 cumulative deaths were
recorded in each of the countries and
we're now quite a way across the slide
to 60 hour days in some of the countries
the message is the same as I've said to
you before that there are kind of three
broad trends on this curve but I do want
to emphasize to you these are numbers
they are not rates they do not adjust
for the size of the underlying
population and this is a difficulty in
intern
putting these data we will in the course
of time be able to get all caused
age-adjusted excess mortality for many
of the countries on this slide and that
will give us a much clearer
understanding of what is going on and
hopefully those data will continue for a
long period of time
so that we can understand the fullness
of the picture as we try to beat this
virus I will stop there with the data
and hand back to the Secretary of State
thank you very much Jonathan and we're
now going to take questions and the
first question from a member of the
public we have a video from sac Lane
from London
what is being done to ensure that be AME
key workers are not disproportionately
affected by Kerr vid 19 and what steps
are being taken to provide support to
the families of those victims who are
sadly passed away Thank You Sakhalin an
incredibly important question to
impending incredibly important questions
both of which we're working hard to
address and I'm going to ask Jonathan to
set out the details but what I'd say
absolutely from the start is that we
recognize that there has been a
disproportionately high number of people
from black and ethnic minority
backgrounds who have passed away
especially amongst the care workers and
those in the NHS and I I pay tribute to
them before and I will do so again
because the NHS is an amazing
organization that has been built on the
dedication of people from all
backgrounds and it's including many many
who've come to this country to to give
their lives working in the NHS and
disproportionately employs people from
ethnic minority backgrounds and yet we
have seen this impact in the data and I
think it's affected a lot of us working
on it to see the hat
and so we've got a lot of work going in
to fully understand scientifically and
make sure that in every single case we
learn what we can to protect people
better in terms of support for the
families of those who've passed away for
those working in the NHS we have a we
now have a program of support that we've
been able to put in place that is there
for everybody who has say is from a
family where where somebody has died
while since ervice and including across
pharmacy across social can that's so
that I think that's a really important
thing for us to do to recognize the the
sacrifice of those put themselves at
risk by going to work in this in what
can be dangerous conditions where they
might be working with those who have
covered 19 Jonathan yes I'm extremely
sorry whenever I hear of a health care
worker death due to coronavirus whether
it's someone from a black and minority
ethnic group or otherwise it doesn't
change the fact that it takes courage to
work in the NHS at a time like this
and it's most difficult on the subject
of the signal that we have so far on
black and minority ethnic groups I want
to say to you that we are taking it
incredibly seriously there is a very big
piece of scientific work now ongoing
that will report to the chief medical
officer and we'll get to the bottom of
this however long it takes us but I will
also say that this is a complicated
picture because when you start to study
patterns of disease across different
ethnic groups you also have to take into
account potential differences in the age
structure between groups also
differences in the patterns of
underlying medical condition
which we know do vary by ethnic group
and therefore it's a complicated picture
and also deprivation has to be taken
into account where people live and all
of this is complex it takes time and I'm
not going to rush the answer I think we
owe it to minority ethnic groups to get
this right and get a clear signal for
you and you'll have worked out I'm from
an ethnic minority group and we will get
to the bottom of this it could be that
Professor Newton has some further
epidemiological granularity he'd like to
add on this point thank you Jonathan
well just to say that we are as you say
looking at the data very carefully not
just on ethnicity but also on age sex
and other factors such as obesity which
we know do have an impact on the effect
of coronavirus but it's already clear
from some of the published data that the
impacted in vme groups is greater that
there are more people with the infection
and those who have the infection have
have worse outcomes in many cases so
there is already cause for concern but
as Johnson says we're not entirely
entirely clear how much of that is due
to different levels of underlying
conditions or other risk factors so
there is work to be done and we will be
publishing this as soon as it's ready
thank you very much thank you cycling
the next questions from Conrad from
Ashford and Conrad asks going forward
will the primary aim of test track and
trace be to squash the occurrence of
covered 19 infection to very low levels
or simply to flatten the curve enough
that the NHS is not overwhelmed and that
is a really important question Conrad
the answer is that test track and trace
will help us to get the r down and to
get the number of new cases down and to
keep it down but not on its own it's
primarily the social distancing measures
that we've taken so far that have
flattened the curve and now the we can
see that the curve is going down from
the presentation that Professor van Town
just gave the goal is to keep the number
of new infections
going down and bringing the test track
and trace or at a point which we will do
well tomorrow from tomorrow in the Isle
of Wight and then rolling out to the
rest of the country will will that we
will get those numbers down the test
tracking trace becomes more effective
the lower the number and then we want to
keep the number going down by keeping
the are below one the rate of infection
so it is not our goal is not simply to
flatten the curve it is to get the
occurrence of covered 19 infections to
very low levels to be absolutely clear
within your question that that is the
answer thanks very much and we'll now
take questions from the media upin from
the BBC thank you very much
when will you have recruited your 18,000
contact tracers and when will the full
test track and trace network be up and
running the aim is to have the whole
thing up and running in the by the
middle of this month if we're starting
already we've already started the
recruitment we have of the 18,000 we
have thousands already recruited and we
are making very rapid progress not only
in the recruitment but also the the
training that's necessary a short piece
of training and we have enough to get
going on the Isle of Wight in fact they
came on stream as of 5 o'clock this
evening so there that's I'm running now
and then to roll out across the country
but there's no there's no magic around
the 18,000 figure that is the initial
scale that we think is necessary if we
needs to be bigger when we find out from
the ons survey that's in the field at
the moment what the prevalence of the
disease is the number of new cases per
day actually out there rather than that
that we find through positive tests then
we will then we'll adjust that figure
that's the initial goal but it'll be up
and running by the middle of the month
of course
on business some businesses will be
required to have PPE for their staff
where will they procure it and will they
be in competition with the NHS well this
is a really important question when we
consider changes to the social
distancing measures the wider impact of
changes to social distancing measures
including for instance on PPE and the
first call 1pp must go to the NHS and
social care and those other essential
services who need it to keep the people
delivering those services safe and so
that is something that we take into
account it's in our five tests but it is
something that we're working very hard
on now of course it's our job in running
the health and social care system to
ensure that those areas and the other
public services have PPE but and there's
a worldwide shortage as you say so we do
need to take that into consideration
before making before making changes and
that's why it's one of the five tests
thanks very much
Tom Clark from ITV Thank You Secretary
of State's um the most successful
contact tracing efforts around the world
like those of you now South Korea
Singapore were only partly reliant on
mobile phone technology in order to work
they were more aligned on large numbers
of volunteers on a community level going
out to track down and trace cases at
huge scale has the government insured
this capacity is in place in the UK or
are we putting too much faith in call
centres and in untested it's a really
important point and I agree with the
with the point in the question which is
that it isn't just about the technology
and the people in call centres it's also
about citizens acting in the right way
acting in the right way to download the
app because that protects you and
protects your family and protects the
NHS
but also acting in the right way to do
contact tracing yourself John really
good it's a really good point well made
the app is very exciting and the app
adds something extra that's some an
automated response that can be almost
immediate but as you say the program
that we're putting in place is an
integrated program with the app but also
with contact tracing driven by testing
so access to testing partly through the
app but also other routes to a test and
then the test result backed up by
contact tracing driven by public health
professionals at one level we've got
public health England but also a lot of
experience on the ground with directors
of public health and local authorities
environmental health officers who are
very expert in this exactly as you say
shoe-leather epidemiology out on the
streets
finding contacts and but even actually
what people call traditional contact
tracing isn't very traditional anymore
it's quite also it's quite highly
technical so we've developed a web-based
support the contact tracing and advisory
service which has been ramped up to
support this and there's also another
line of defense who's a telephone call
center so it's a multi-layered approach
and one of the points of the island-wide
test pilot is to try and see how those
different elements integrate together to
support each other so it's a very good
point we are learning from the best
practice around the world but we also
have something to offer in the UK as
well because we've been doing this for a
long time thanks Tom I hope that answers
your question yes I may have a quick
follow up question are we are we caught
in something of a catch-22 with contact
tracing as I understand it the numbers
of cases have to fall quite a bit more
before we can reliably roll it out
across the country but if we keep
lockdown measures in place which we have
to until your fifth test is met it's
quite hard to highlight contact tracing
because most of us are trying to isolate
ourselves as much as possible and so
know it's the short answer the and a lot
of slightly longer answer is that even
with social no social distancing
measures there still are some new cases
and the and that means that the
that the technology can still be
effective and even with the scale of of
of new cases across the country contact
tracing can still have an impact and the
app will still be highly effective it's
just more effective the fewer the number
of new cases so these are all matters of
degree rather than absolute so we're not
caught in a in a in a catch-22 but it is
absolutely true that the social
distancing measures of all the thing
that in doing they're having the big
impact and so the hence the you know the
message remains stay at home to protect
the NHS and save lives unless you're in
the Isle of Wight but in your even in
the Isle of Wight you should still stay
at home to protect the NHS and save
lives it's that you should also install
the app because that will help it this
to be yet more effective one final point
on this which is the Isle of Wight has a
slightly lower rate of covert new covert
infections than some other places in the
country and therefore actually is a that
makes it a good place to test this not
only is it good because it will help the
Isle of Wight but it is also good
because it has that slightly lower
number of new infections measures until
contact tracing is up and running across
the country no the two aren't aren't
necessarily linked like that we haven't
said that you we can't make changes
before it's up and running
it's just that the test track and trace
system will help us to get our down and
hold our down and the lower the number
of new cases the more effective it will
be but we haven't made a concrete link
that your question drew between the
number between the having this system of
in place nationally and making changes
to the social distancing measures we
there isn't a necessary link between the
two they're just they they do work in
tandem the next
from Oliver Dyer from I love white radio
even an O in a poll that I love white
radio ran today 80% of our listeners
said they would install this new app but
the island has a higher than average
elderly population who fall into the
governments of vulnerable category
how are you expecting those who don't
have a smartphone or can't use that
technology bids on the island or across
the country to get behind this and with
that in mind considering the islands has
an elderly population one of the
questions our listeners want to know is
why the islands been chosen over other
over as a UK islands or locations so
look that's a great set of questions
Oliver and I'm really really pleased to
hear that 80% of people said that they
would download the app and because the
more people who download the app the
more effective it's going to be because
it's a you need you need two people
having downloaded the app for it to be
effective for one to be able to tell the
other that they've been in close contact
with somebody who's got symptoms of Cove
at 19 and so I'm really pleased that the
people of the Isle of Wight have
responded today in this way I had a
feeling that they would and I'm really
glad that they have and but partly
because of the challenges that you set
out that not everybody has a smartphone
that that's that's another reason
actually to test it in the Isle of Wight
because if we tested it somewhere where
it would be easy we wouldn't find as
many of the challenges rather than
testing it somewhere where you've got to
do that you've got to have the
technology but you've got to have the
human contact tracing as well they go
they go hand in hand they help each
other and so that's that is actually one
of the things we thought about before
choosing the Isle of Wight as the as the
place to go first
John do you yeah thank you I mean I
think the other white is an ideal place
to do this
it's quite a large population and there
is a benefit in the fact that travel on
and off the island is relatively
restricted the ferries are there but
they're running relatively infrequently
so it is an ideal place to look at the
epidemiology and see the impact and it's
also I used to be the regional direct
public health south-central including
the Alawite I know that the island the
island is is very well equipped to
respond to things that is it's a very
coherent group we've had tremendous
support from the local authority from
the NHS from the local MP and like
everybody else I think it's going to be
a great success as a as a pilot and your
point about elderly people I think we
shouldn't first you shouldn't make
assumptions and then quite a lot of
elderly people are extremely tech savvy
and quite happy to use smart phones but
we've also recognized that there are
other ways of doing contact tracing so
as I mentioned we've built in a number
of routes so people don't have to have
the app in order to benefit but of
course we will all benefit if the app
and the contact tracing drives down the
infection rate it drives down the
infection rate for everybody and I think
the third point to say is that the
people who are most mobile and most
likely to be out bumping into each other
are also the people who are probably
most likely to be using smartphones so I
think all in all we think it's a strong
program and we're looking forward to
seeing how it works in your Isle of
Wight and that that survey is extremely
encouraging so thank you it does yeah
I'm gonna add one more follow-up go
ahead fantastic so obviously whilst a
lot of people were lalala by radio
listens in particular I have been
positive about the app there are some
concerns that the lockdown measures
could be lifted here early to form part
of that trial could lock down on the
eyelid weight being lifted earlier than
the rest of the UK and if so is it safe
to do so well I want to thank Isle of
Wight radio listeners for how much
they've engaged with this this this idea
today and I can reassure you that there
aren't any changes to social distancing
measures that are proposed as part of
this pilot the pilot is to find out how
the app works how the interaction of
people then becomes recognized by the
technology and the the link from that to
the human contact tracing and to the
testing regime because there's a new
testing center on the Isle of Wight as
well and so there aren't changes our
proposals are that changes to be to the
social distancing will only take place
when the five tests are met and that's
nationally rather than the Isle of Wight
having having any differences in that
part to the rest of the country thanks
very much indeed Oliver Joe Murphy from
the Evening Standard good afternoon
um can I ask the scientists
how has your understanding of immunity
developed over the last month or so do
you know yet whether people will catch
it again and how are the tests
developing how the testing of the tests
going do you see antibodies and immunity
playing a really significant role in
easing out of lockdown or not and
secretaries take if I could just ask a
follow to Conrad's question who asked
how low the numbers we go you said very
low can you put a figure on that the
answer to the second question is no and
the answer to the first question is and
I'll say a little and then I'll ask both
scientists to come in John on the
testing and JBT on the science of
immunity what I'd say is that antibody
testing is incredibly important we have
antibody tests in the field at the
moment they're being used for surveys
they are lab based rather than the
rather than the automatic response tests
that we looked into in great detail a
month or so ago but then none of them
were effective enough to be used for
clinical reasons but they can still be
used for surveys so we have surveys in
the field both with the the stick tests
and also with lab based serology which
detects antibodies so we will be getting
estimates soon of the proportion of the
population who have the antibodies and
the test tests for whether the
antibodies are there the effect of the
antibodies on your risk to catching or
transmitting corona virus in the future
is
is the next important step in that and
the science on that has been rapidly
developing and I asked jvt to update on
that yes thank you for the question
so on antibodies one of the things we
want to know is when you've had in Kovac
19 infection do you get antibodies do
they protect you against further
instances of the same illness and how
long are they going to protect you for
so that's kind of three questions really
so let's chop this up into three answers
and the first answer is the first thing
we wanted to know was once you've had
confirmed kovat 19 infection do you get
antibodies and one of the things that
we've been interested in and want to do
is call people back who've had a Ovid 19
for sure and who've recovered to ask
them if they'll begin to take part in a
program we're starting to get plasma
containing antibodies and use it for
treatment in the future in trials to
understand if it's going to work and
save lives and the good news on that is
that that program has started and the
overwhelming majority of people so far
called back who've had definite kovat 19
infection have got antibodies in their
bloodstream which is a good news thing
so those antibodies take different times
in different people to develop but by
and large the signal is that people get
antibodies the next question is do those
antibodies protect you from further
infections and we just haven't had this
disease around on the planet in humans
for long enough to know the answers to
that with any surety and that's a piece
of science that we will just have to
follow a bit longer I hope the answer is
yes
but I think it's one where we have to be
much clearer before
we can take that responsibility of
giving you a very clear answer on that
and then the final piece is how long
will the antibodies last and we do know
that for other normal coronaviruses if
that's the right word the ones that are
a couple of viruses that together with
many others cause what we'd call the
common cold that those antibodies don't
persist necessarily for years and years
and years now it doesn't follow that
that's going to be the case with kovat
19 we do not know at this point we will
have to simply follow people who have
recovered and test them repeatedly until
we have an understanding of how long
antibodies last and how long they
protect for but there is an absolutely
massive piece of work now underway
multiple studies to look for antibodies
in different populations in the UK and
indeed to follow some people who've
recovered for long periods of time into
the future at least a couple of years
and we will have much clearer signals
over time but I'm afraid it's just one
of those where we can't make the science
go any faster than how quickly our
bodies go in terms of maintaining the
antibodies and like everybody else in
the world we just have to be patient and
cautious until we get those answers but
I do believe in the long run once we
have those kind of answers potentially
antibody testing will be a very
important part of our future strategy
Thanks in fact so because I was tested
positive and now I have the I have
fairly regularly somebody comes and
takes blood to ensure that to test
whether I have antibodies and then also
to test whether I get it again because
we have surveys in the field right now
to test if people with antibodies then
catch the disease which is an absolutely
critical fact that will then determine
Paulo
see over what we say people with
antibodies who tested positive on an
antibody test can do and which is at the
moment we don't yet have the science to
make those policy decisions but it'll be
absolutely critical John did you have
anything to add on that's just just
briefly on the testing there's been
really very good progress on the
antibody test there are at least two
large commercial organizations who
develop good lab based antibody tests
which we're currently evaluating but
also people looking at ways in of doing
antibody tests close to the person the
patient and there are a number of
options there including a saliva test
and all of these options are looking
quite promising and being evaluated so I
think in general we can say as we did as
we thought that there would be antibody
tests available when we needed them and
they will support also our contact
tracing program and strategy later on
fantastic if I follow up to state and
thank you all three for very informative
answers there so to state life's full of
risks and this is all about balance of
risks you're somebody who's probably got
antibodies would you feel happy going
into a crowded room not yet not yet I
very much hope that the science shows
that the people with antibodies who
tested positive for having antibodies
have a low risk of transmitting the
disease and a low risk of catching it
both are important because low risk of
catching it to protect me low risk of
transmitting it to protect others
I much hope that that's where the
science comes out that is true of most
corona viruses i but we've got to make
sure that we've got the science because
until we know that's the case we can't
be sure of it we can't base a policy
decision on it and I can't be
comfortable doing what you mentioned in
the question because that might simply
trigger a rise in the number of
infections if the science turns out that
to be wrong and there are so many novel
things about this corona virus the there
are so many things that are different to
previous there's the six
existing coronaviruses that we do have
to test this and not base our
assumptions on how other coronaviruses
behave because you you know I we don't
want to take the risk of assuming this
coronavirus behaves like other
coronaviruses before saying and taking a
policy decision that people with
antibodies are our lower risk but if the
science concludes that they that they
are then will take decisions on on that
basis and I would say this this point of
John's that there's been big advances in
antibody testing especially the lab
based antibody testing is very it's very
important today rush the Swiss global
Diagnostics company made a very positive
announcement about progress with their
antibody tests and we're in discussions
with them about a very large-scale
rollout of antibody testing as well as
with some others who may be able to
bring this forward but there's been
false hope before in antibody testing
and so I'm will will make announcements
when we're absolutely ready thanks very
much Joe Paul wor from the huffington
post l secretary as you frequently said
the long term solution to this pandemic
is a fully scaled up vaccine for Kovan
19 yeah but a vaccine relies on as many
people as possible actually taking it up
now you told HuffPost last year and i
quote there's a very strong argument for
having compulsory vaccinations for
children for when they go to school
because otherwise they're putting other
children at risk would that apply to a
covert vaccine as well as to MMR and
other vaccines and what other measures
are you looking at to ensure as many
adults and children take up the new
vaccine when it's available and if I can
to professor van Tam can I ask you what
you've made of the early academic
research done in Harvard Germany and
even Cambridge that suggests high levels
of air pollution may be one of the most
important contributors to the clustering
of deaths from kovin 19 is sage looking
at that or going to look at that thanks
Paul two very good questions on the
vaccine and the first and most important
thing is that we support the development
of the vaccine and you all have seen the
Prime Minister's
excellent announcement today and then
that we also ensure do the work to
ensure that people can get access to the
vaccines starting with those who are
most vulnerable and the on the question
of whether to make it compulsory I think
that the extent of the public's reaction
to following the lockdown shows that we
will be able to achieve very very high
levels of vaccination without taking
that step and and so you know our task
is to ensure that it is in the first
instance that we support the science as
much as possible because we called
assume they'll be a vaccine
there's no coronavirus vaccine yet and
for any of the existing coronaviruses
and this is uncertain science but whilst
I don't rule anything out i we're
presuming we're proceeding on the basis
that just such a huge proportion of the
population are going to take this up
because of the obvious benefits to
individuals and their families and their
communities and indeed the whole nation
that there'll be an enormous demand for
it as and when the science is safe to
proceed
thank you so just to stay on the vaccine
question for a little longer and we are
following the developments in vaccine
research across the world including in
the UK we remain very hopeful that there
will be a breakthrough at some point in
the future I think what I can say to you
is that it is more likely than not that
the first vaccines will be licensed in
adults in the first instance and
therefore will has to take put some
caveats around your question around
children and the other thing to say is
that so far the epidemiological evidence
is not showing us that there is a
massive burden of disease or burden of
mortality in children it is actually
completely at the other end of the scale
it is in the elderly
and so from that perspective again
that's another caveat I'd add to your
question about vaccinating children on
the second question about air pollution
and thank you for that I think we
already have a very solid data that air
pollution contributes to a whole range
of mortality particularly from
respiratory illnesses and respiratory
diseases and cardiovascular disease I
have heard it said about air pollution
and Cove in nineteen I have not
personally studied those data and looked
at that question in detail but what you
say is entirely plausible in my view and
professor Newton may have some further
observations on air pollution well
they're only your general point that we
know that air pollution because it's so
pervasive and affects so many people has
a huge burden but like Jonathan I
haven't looked at those papers but but I
think there's something that we will get
back to you yeah just one brief
follow-up secretary of state you have a
message for those anti-vaxxers here and
abroad when we when and if we do get a
vaccine for Cove in nineteen I think
there has been no greater demonstration
in modern history that vaccines save
lives than the need for a vaccine to
save lives and to get the world going
again following the outbreak of Cove at
19 and we will only license a vaccine
when it is both effective and safe and
when the independent regulators if and
when the independent regulators license
a vaccine in this country they will do
so knowing that it will that it is safe
and everybody should follow that
everybody should follow that advice
thanks very much
so finally we're going to go to Louise
Hill from the Isle of Wight County press
Thank You mr. secretary and as local
democracy reporter on the Isle of Wight
I have
a mixed reaction to the app but a main
concern that keeps occurring is whether
you can assure island residents who were
wary of using the app when this
technology that their data will be kept
fully protected and private throughout
this trial and going forward and the
government will be fully transparent
with Islanders about the way this app
works yes absolutely this is an
incredibly important question I was very
glad to hear from Oliver from Isle of
Wight radio that on his initial survey
there was a very high degree of support
for the for the app and for downloading
it but it has been the app has been
designed with privacy and security front
of mind it's been signed off by the
national cybersecurity center who've
been involved in its development and I
want to thank them and pay tribute to
the work that they've done in ensuring
that the privacy and cybersecurity is
strong the data is stored on an
individual's phone not by the by the NHS
until somebody finds that they've got
symptoms and then they need a test and
so they need to connect to the NHS and
then you need to the NHS needs to
contact those who you've been in contact
with and so the the this has this has
the highest level of privacy built in to
make sure that we can both reassure
people in terms of privacy but also that
it can be effective and save lives I
don't know if you've got anything
exactly right so just to be absolutely
clear the app itself doesn't hold any
personal information it just has
information about the phone where it was
which other phones it's been in contact
with but only using anonymized randomly
generated numbers and those are the data
that are collected so no personal
information is generally that is
contained by the app or generated by the
app the circus-like the only personal
information used is when somebody
approaches the NHS to have a test or to
have their contact right so it is a it's
a very safe use of data and people
really should feel very reassured by all
the proportions that have been taken
thanks very much in
thank you from the island have you got
to follow up you've got it so as you
said earlier we're told to look down
won't be eased on the island as part of
the roller rollout of this act does that
that means people are already either at
home or making very limited trips and as
the app is predominantly aimed at the
islands Keys workers will that guarantee
enough useful data for the app going
forward this is a really important
question that we thought about when
selecting where to to trial it because
there's a busy hospital on the island
and there's other and key workers
including those who work for the council
for instance and in the other services
and the right across the board there are
there are interactions and there are new
cases on the island and so we think that
that it will be effective and it would
be an effective place to pilot but also
but we think that the that the test
track and trace system as a whole will
be more effective when there are fewer
new cases because then when you do find
a new case we can really support that
person find out who they've been in
contact with and then contact all of
those people and it's quite a metallo of
effort and support into then trying to
stop that case from spreading any
further so actually the the the test
track and trade system as a whole will
be more effective when there's fewer
cases and currently there are fewer
cases on the island than there are in
the rest of the country thank you very
much indeed thanks to for all the
questions from the public from the
national media from the Isle of Wight
and and I'm very grateful for this
opportunity to have set out these
details of our test track a test track
and trace program and look forward to
seeing you again here from here in
Downing Street very soon thanks very
much